Blog post - Moving from ruby to rust blog post (#199)
deliveroo/deliveroo.engineering: _posts/2019-01-31-moving-from-ruby-to-rust.md

---
layout: post
title:  "Moving from Ruby to Rust"
authors:
  - "Andrii Dmytrenko"
excerpt: >
  How we migrated our Tier 1 service from ruby to rust and didn't break production
---

## Table of Contents
{:.no_toc}

1. Automatic Table of Contents Here
{:toc}

## Background

> In Logistics Algorithms team, we have a service, called Dispatcher, the main purpose of which is to assign orders to riders.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Logistics Algorithms team, we have a service, called Dispatcher, the main purpose of which is to assign orders to riders.
```

which didn't help much. It was clear that Ruby was a bottleneck here and we started looking at the alternatives.

## Why Rust?

We considered a few approaches to how to solve the problem of dispatch speed:

* choose a new programming language with better performance characteristics and rewrite the Dispatcher
* identify biggest bottlenecks, rewrite those parts of the code and somehow integrate them in the current code

We knew that rewriting something from scratch is risky, as it can introduce bugs, and switching services over can be painful, so we didn't feel quite comfortable with this approach.
Another option, finding bottlenecks and replacing them, was something that we did already for one part of the code (we built a native extension gem for the Hungarian route matching algorithm, implemented in Rust), and that worked well.
We decided to try this approach.

There were several options how we could integrate parts of the code written in another language to work with Ruby:
* build an external service and provide an API to communicate with
* build a native extension

We quickly discarded an option to build an external service, because either we would need to call this

> external service hundreds thousand times per dispatch cycle and the overhead of the communication would offset all of the potential

Reviewer: ```suggestion
external service hundreds of thousands of times per dispatch cycle and the overhead of the communication would offset all of the potential
```

speed gains, or we would need to reimplement a big part of the dispatcher inside this service, which is almost the same as a complete rewrite.

We decided that it has to be some sort of native extension, and for that, we decided to use Rust, as it ticked most of the boxes for us:

* it has high performance (comparable to C)
* it is memory safe
* it can be used to build dynamic libraries, which can be loaded into Ruby (using `extern "C"` interface)

Some of our team members had experience with Rust and liked the language, also one part of the Dispatcher was already using Rust.

> Our strategy was to replace current ruby implementation gradually, by replacing parts of the algorithm one by one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our strategy was to replace the current ruby implementation gradually, by replacing parts of the algorithm one by one.
```

It was possible because we could implement separate methods and classes in Rust and call them from Ruby without a big overhead of cross-language interaction.

## How we made Ruby talk to Rust

There a few different ways you can call Rust from Ruby:

> * write a dynamic library in Rust with `extern "C"` interface and call it using FFI.

Reviewer: Maybe explain what FFI is / what it stands for? Not sure everyone is familiar with it.

Author: I added a link to ruby's FFI wiki

* write a dynamic library, but use the Ruby API to register methods, so that you can call them from Ruby directly, just like any other Ruby code.

The first approach, using FFI would require us to come up with some custom C like interfaces in both Rust and Ruby and then create wrappers for them in both languages.
The second approach, using Ruby API, sounded more promising, as there were already libraries to make our lives easier:

* [ruru](https://github.com/d-unseductable/ruru) and [rutie](https://github.com/danielpclark/rutie)
* [Helix](https://github.com/tildeio/helix)

We tried Helix first:

> * it has macros which look like writing Ruby in Rust, which was a bit more magical for us than we found comfortable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* it has macros which look like writing Ruby in Rust, which was a bit more magical for us than we were comfortable with
```

* the Coercion Protocol wasn't well documented and it wasn't clear how would you go about passing non-primitive Ruby objects into Helix methods
* we were not sure about the safety - it looked like Helix didn't call Ruby methods using [`rb_protect`](https://silverhammermba.github.io/emberb/c/#rb_protect), which could lead to undefined behavior

> Eventually, we decided to go with ruru/rutie, but keep Ruby layer thin and isolated so that we could possibly switch in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Eventually, we decided to go with ruru/rutie, but keep the Ruby layer thin and isolated so that we could possibly switch in the future.
```

```rust
pub struct RustUser {
    name: String,
    address: Address,
}

pub struct Address {
    pub country: String,
    pub city: String,
}

class!(User);

impl VerifiedObject for User {
    fn is_correct_type<T: Object>(object: &T) -> bool {
        object.send("class").send("name").try_convert_to::<RString>().to_string() == "User"
    }

    fn error_message() -> &'static str {
        "Not a valid request"
    }
}

methods!(
    // .. some code skipped

    fn hello(user: AnyObject) -> Boolean {
        let name = user.send("name").try_convert_to::<RString>().unwrap().to_string();
        let ruby_address = user.send("address");
        let country = ruby_address.send("country").try_convert_to::<RString>().unwrap().to_string();
        let city = ruby_address.send("city").try_convert_to::<RString>().unwrap().to_string();
        let address = Address {
            country,
            city
        };
        let rust_user = RustUser {
            name,
            address
        };
        do_something_with_user(&rust_user);
        Boolean::new(true)
    }
)
```

> You can see a lot of routine and repetitive code here, there's also missing proper error handling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can see a lot of routine and repetitive code here, proper error handling is missing as well.
```

    it 'returns correct travel time' do
      expect(TravelTime.get(from_location, to_location, options)).to eq(123.45)
    end
  end

  context "ruby implementation" do
    before do
      Feature.disable!(:rust_travel_time)
    end

    include "travel_time"
  end

  context "rust implementation" do
    before do
      Feature.enable!(:rust_travel_time)
    end

    include "travel_time"
  end
end
```

It was also very important that, at any time, we could switch off the Rust integration and the Dispatcher would still work (because we kept the Ruby implementation along with Rust and kept adding feature flags).

## Performance Improvements

When moving more larger chunks of code into Rust, we noticed increased performance improvements which we were carefully monitoring.
When moving smaller modules to Rust, we didn't expect much improvement: in fact, some code became slower because it was being called in tight loops, and there was a small overhead to calling Rust code from the Ruby application.

### Performance numbers

In the Dispatcher, there are 3 main phases of the dispatch cycle:

* loading data
* running computation, calculating assignments
* saving/sending assignments

> Loading data and saving data phases scale pretty much linearly depending on the dataset size, while computation phase (which we moved to Rust) has an higher-order polynomial component in it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Loading data and saving data phases scale pretty much linearly depending on the dataset size, while the computation phase (which we moved to Rust) has an higher-order polynomial component in it.
```

We are less worried about the loading/saving data phases, and we didn't prioritise speeding up those phases yet.

> While still having loading data and sending data back parts of the Dispatcher written in Ruby, total dispatch time was significantly reduced: for example, total dispatch time in one of our larger zones dropped from ~4 sec to 0.8 sec.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While loading data and sending data back were still parts of the Dispatcher written in Ruby, the total dispatch time was significantly reduced: for example, in one of our larger zones it dropped from ~4 sec to 0.8 sec.
```

<figure>
![Total dispatch time](/images/posts/moving-from-ruby-to-rust/total_dispatch_time.png)
</figure>

> Out of those 0.8 seconds, roughly 0.2 seconds were spent in Rust, in the computation phase. This means 0.6 second is a Ruby/DB overhead of loading data and sending assignments to riders. It looks like the dispatch cycle is only 5 times quicker now, but actually, the computation phase in this example time was reduced from ~3.4sec to 0.2sec, which is 17x speedup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Out of those 0.8 seconds, roughly 0.2 seconds were spent in Rust, in the computation phase. This means 0.6 second is a Ruby/DB overhead of loading data and sending assignments to riders. It looks like the dispatch cycle is only 5 times quicker now, but actually, the computation phase in this example time was reduced from ~3.4sec to 0.2sec, which is a 17x speedup.
```

<figure>
![Computation phase time](/images/posts/moving-from-ruby-to-rust/computation_time.png)
</figure>

> Keep in mind, that Rust code is almost a 1:1 copy of the Ruby in terms of the implementation, and we didn't add any additional optimisations (like caching, avoiding copying memory in some cases), so there is still room for the improvement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keep in mind, that Rust code is almost a 1:1 copy of the Ruby code in terms of the implementation, and we didn't add any additional optimisations (like caching, avoiding copying memory in some cases), so there is still room for improvement.
```
